README.md, before:

# Wrappers

`Wrappers` is a development framework for Postgres Foreign Data Wrappers ([FDW](https://wiki.postgresql.org/wiki/Foreign_data_wrappers)), written in Rust. Its goal is to make Postgres FDW development easier while keeping Rust language's modern capabilities, such as high performance, strong types, and safety.

`Wrappers` is also a collection of FDWs built by [Supabase](https://www.supabase.com). We currently support the following FDWs, with more under development:

| FDW                                             | Description                                                                   | Read | Modify |
| ----------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ---- | ------ |
| [HelloWorld](./wrappers/src/fdw/helloworld_fdw) | A demo FDW to show how to develop a basic FDW.                                |      |        |
| [BigQuery](./wrappers/src/fdw/bigquery_fdw)     | A FDW for Google [BigQuery](https://cloud.google.com/bigquery)                | ✅   | ✅     |
| [Clickhouse](./wrappers/src/fdw/clickhouse_fdw) | A FDW for [ClickHouse](https://clickhouse.com/)                               | ✅   | ✅     |
| [Stripe](./wrappers/src/fdw/stripe_fdw)         | A FDW for [Stripe](https://stripe.com/) API                                   | ✅   | ✅     |
| [Firebase](./wrappers/src/fdw/firebase_fdw)     | A FDW for Google [Firebase](https://firebase.google.com/)                     | ✅   | ❌     |
| [Airtable](./wrappers/src/fdw/airtable_fdw)     | A FDW for [Airtable](https://airtable.com/) API                               | ✅   | ❌     |
| [S3](./wrappers/src/fdw/s3_fdw)                 | A FDW for [AWS S3](https://aws.amazon.com/s3/)                                | ✅   | ❌     |
| [Logflare](./wrappers/src/fdw/logflare_fdw)     | A FDW for [Logflare](https://logflare.app/)                                   | ✅   | ❌     |
| [Auth0](./wrappers/src/fdw/auth0_fdw)           | A FDW for [Auth0](https://auth0.com/)                                         | ✅   | ❌     |
| [SQL Server](./wrappers/src/fdw/mssql_fdw)      | A FDW for [Microsoft SQL Server](https://www.microsoft.com/en-au/sql-server/) | ✅   | ❌     |
| [Redis](./wrappers/src/fdw/redis_fdw)           | A FDW for [Redis](https://redis.io/)                                          | ✅   | ❌     |
| [AWS Cognito](./wrappers/src/fdw/cognito_fdw)   | A FDW for [AWS Cognito](https://aws.amazon.com/cognito/)                      | ✅   | ❌     |
| [Notion](./wrappers/src/fdw/notion_fdw)         | A FDW for [Notion](https://www.notion.so/)                                    | ✅   | ❌     |

### Warning

Restoring a logical backup of a database with a materialized view using a foreign table can fail. For this reason, either do not use foreign tables in materialized views or use them in databases with physical backups enabled.

## Features

- Minimum interface and easy to implement.
- Support for rich data types.
- Support both sync and async backends, such as RDBMS, RESTful APIs, flat files and etc.
- Built on top of [pgrx](https://github.com/tcdi/pgrx), providing higher level interfaces, without hiding lower-level C APIs.
- `WHERE`, `ORDER BY`, `LIMIT` pushdown are supported.

## Documentation

- [Usage Docs](https://supabase.github.io/wrappers/)
- [Developer Docs (docs.rs)](https://docs.rs/supabase-wrappers/latest/supabase_wrappers/)

## Installation

`Wrappers` is a pgrx extension, you can follow the [pgrx installation steps](https://github.com/tcdi/pgrx#system-requirements) to install Wrappers.

Basically, run below command to install FDW after `pgrx` is installed. For example,

```bash
cargo pgrx install --pg-config [path_to_pg_config] --features stripe_fdw
```

## Developing a FDW

To develop a FDW using `Wrappers`, you only need to implement the [ForeignDataWrapper](./supabase-wrappers/src/interface.rs) trait.

```rust
pub trait ForeignDataWrapper {
    // create a FDW instance
    fn new(...) -> Self;

    // functions for data scan, e.g. select
    fn begin_scan(...);
    fn iter_scan(...) -> Option<Row>;
    fn end_scan(...);

    // functions for data modify, e.g. insert, update and delete
    fn begin_modify(...);
    fn insert(...);
    fn update(...);
    fn delete(...);
    fn end_modify(...);

    // other optional functions
    ...
}
```

In a minimum FDW, which supports data scan only, `new()`, `begin_scan()`, `iter_scan()` and `end_scan()` are required, all the other functions are optional.

To know more about FDW development, please visit the [Wrappers documentation](https://docs.rs/supabase-wrappers/latest/supabase_wrappers/).

## Basic usage

These steps outline how to use the a demo FDW [HelloWorldFdw](./wrappers/src/fdw/helloworld_fdw), which only outputs a single line of fake data:

1. Clone this repo

```bash
git clone https://github.com/supabase/wrappers.git
```

2. Run it using pgrx with feature:

```bash
cd wrappers/wrappers
cargo pgrx run pg15 --features helloworld_fdw
```

3. Create the extension, foreign data wrapper and related objects:

```sql
-- create extension
create extension wrappers;

-- create foreign data wrapper and enable 'HelloWorldFdw'
create foreign data wrapper helloworld_wrapper
  handler hello_world_fdw_handler
  validator hello_world_fdw_validator;

-- create server and specify custom options
create server my_helloworld_server
  foreign data wrapper helloworld_wrapper
  options (
    foo 'bar'
  );

-- create an example foreign table
create foreign table hello (
  id bigint,
  col text
)
  server my_helloworld_server
  options (
    foo 'bar'
  );
```

4. Run a query to check if it is working:

```sql
wrappers=# select * from hello;
 id |    col
----+-------------
  0 | Hello world
(1 row)
```

## Running tests

In order to run tests in `wrappers`:

```bash
docker-compose -f .ci/docker-compose.yaml up -d
cargo pgrx test --features all_fdws,pg15
```

## Limitations

- Windows is not supported, that limitation inherits from [pgrx](https://github.com/tcdi/pgrx).
- Currently only supports PostgreSQL v14, v15 and v16.
- Generated column is not supported.

## Contribution

All contributions, feature requests, bug report or ideas are welcomed.

## License

[Apache License Version 2.0](./LICENSE)

[![crates.io badge](https://img.shields.io/crates/v/supabase-wrappers.svg)](https://crates.io/crates/supabase-wrappers)
[![docs.rs badge](https://docs.rs/supabase-wrappers/badge.svg)](https://docs.rs/supabase-wrappers)
[![Test Status](https://img.shields.io/github/actions/workflow/status/supabase/wrappers/test_wrappers.yml?branch=main&label=test)](https://github.com/supabase/wrappers/actions/workflows/test_wrappers.yml)
[![MIT/Apache-2 licensed](https://img.shields.io/crates/l/supabase-wrappers.svg)](./LICENSE)
[![Contributors](https://img.shields.io/github/contributors/supabase/wrappers)](https://github.com/supabase/wrappers/graphs/contributors)

Commit message:

Add setup script for testing environment

README.md, after:

# Wrappers

`Wrappers` is a development framework for Postgres Foreign Data Wrappers ([FDW](https://wiki.postgresql.org/wiki/Foreign_data_wrappers)), written in Rust. Its goal is to make Postgres FDW development easier while keeping Rust language's modern capabilities, such as high performance, strong types, and safety.

`Wrappers` is also a collection of FDWs built by [Supabase](https://www.supabase.com). We currently support the following FDWs, with more under development:

| FDW                                             | Description                                                                   | Read | Modify |
| ----------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ---- | ------ |
| [HelloWorld](./wrappers/src/fdw/helloworld_fdw) | A demo FDW to show how to develop a basic FDW.                                |      |        |
| [BigQuery](./wrappers/src/fdw/bigquery_fdw)     | A FDW for Google [BigQuery](https://cloud.google.com/bigquery)                | ✅   | ✅     |
| [Clickhouse](./wrappers/src/fdw/clickhouse_fdw) | A FDW for [ClickHouse](https://clickhouse.com/)                               | ✅   | ✅     |
| [Stripe](./wrappers/src/fdw/stripe_fdw)         | A FDW for [Stripe](https://stripe.com/) API                                   | ✅   | ✅     |
| [Firebase](./wrappers/src/fdw/firebase_fdw)     | A FDW for Google [Firebase](https://firebase.google.com/)                     | ✅   | ❌     |
| [Airtable](./wrappers/src/fdw/airtable_fdw)     | A FDW for [Airtable](https://airtable.com/) API                               | ✅   | ❌     |
| [S3](./wrappers/src/fdw/s3_fdw)                 | A FDW for [AWS S3](https://aws.amazon.com/s3/)                                | ✅   | ❌     |
| [Logflare](./wrappers/src/fdw/logflare_fdw)     | A FDW for [Logflare](https://logflare.app/)                                   | ✅   | ❌     |
| [Auth0](./wrappers/src/fdw/auth0_fdw)           | A FDW for [Auth0](https://auth0.com/)                                         | ✅   | ❌     |
| [SQL Server](./wrappers/src/fdw/mssql_fdw)      | A FDW for [Microsoft SQL Server](https://www.microsoft.com/en-au/sql-server/) | ✅   | ❌     |
| [Redis](./wrappers/src/fdw/redis_fdw)           | A FDW for [Redis](https://redis.io/)                                          | ✅   | ❌     |
| [AWS Cognito](./wrappers/src/fdw/cognito_fdw)   | A FDW for [AWS Cognito](https://aws.amazon.com/cognito/)                      | ✅   | ❌     |
| [Notion](./wrappers/src/fdw/notion_fdw)         | A FDW for [Notion](https://www.notion.so/)                                    | ✅   | ❌     |

### Warning

Restoring a logical backup of a database with a materialized view using a foreign table can fail. For this reason, either do not use foreign tables in materialized views or use them in databases with physical backups enabled.

## Features

- Minimum interface and easy to implement.
- Support for rich data types.
- Support both sync and async backends, such as RDBMS, RESTful APIs, flat files and etc.
- Built on top of [pgrx](https://github.com/tcdi/pgrx), providing higher level interfaces, without hiding lower-level C APIs.
- `WHERE`, `ORDER BY`, `LIMIT` pushdown are supported.

## Documentation

- [Usage Docs](https://supabase.github.io/wrappers/)
- [Developer Docs (docs.rs)](https://docs.rs/supabase-wrappers/latest/supabase_wrappers/)

## Installation

`Wrappers` is a pgrx extension, you can follow the [pgrx installation steps](https://github.com/tcdi/pgrx#system-requirements) to install Wrappers.

Basically, run below command to install FDW after `pgrx` is installed. For example,

```bash
cargo pgrx install --pg-config [path_to_pg_config] --features stripe_fdw
```

## Developing a FDW

To develop a FDW using `Wrappers`, you only need to implement the [ForeignDataWrapper](./supabase-wrappers/src/interface.rs) trait.

```rust
pub trait ForeignDataWrapper {
    // create a FDW instance
    fn new(...) -> Self;

    // functions for data scan, e.g. select
    fn begin_scan(...);
    fn iter_scan(...) -> Option<Row>;
    fn end_scan(...);

    // functions for data modify, e.g. insert, update and delete
    fn begin_modify(...);
    fn insert(...);
    fn update(...);
    fn delete(...);
    fn end_modify(...);

    // other optional functions
    ...
}
```

In a minimum FDW, which supports data scan only, `new()`, `begin_scan()`, `iter_scan()` and `end_scan()` are required, all the other functions are optional.

To know more about FDW development, please visit the [Wrappers documentation](https://docs.rs/supabase-wrappers/latest/supabase_wrappers/).

## Basic usage

These steps outline how to use the a demo FDW [HelloWorldFdw](./wrappers/src/fdw/helloworld_fdw), which only outputs a single line of fake data:

1. Clone this repo

```bash
git clone https://github.com/supabase/wrappers.git
```

2. Run it using pgrx with feature:

```bash
cd wrappers/wrappers
cargo pgrx run pg15 --features helloworld_fdw
```

3. Create the extension, foreign data wrapper and related objects:

```sql
-- create extension
create extension wrappers;

-- create foreign data wrapper and enable 'HelloWorldFdw'
create foreign data wrapper helloworld_wrapper
  handler hello_world_fdw_handler
  validator hello_world_fdw_validator;

-- create server and specify custom options
create server my_helloworld_server
  foreign data wrapper helloworld_wrapper
  options (
    foo 'bar'
  );

-- create an example foreign table
create foreign table hello (
  id bigint,
  col text
)
  server my_helloworld_server
  options (
    foo 'bar'
  );
```

4. Run a query to check if it is working:

```sql
wrappers=# select * from hello;
 id |    col
----+-------------
  0 | Hello world
(1 row)
```

## Testing Setup

To set up a testing environment for the wrappers, you can use the `setup_test_env.sh` script located in the root directory of the project. This script installs all the prerequisites for testing the wrappers, including the Rust toolchain, pgrx dependencies, and runs the helloworld wrapper as a test.

To use the script, simply run:
(MacOS only)

```bash
./setup_test_env.sh
```

This will ensure that all necessary components are installed and configured correctly for testing.

## Running tests

In order to run tests in `wrappers`:

```bash
docker-compose -f .ci/docker-compose.yaml up -d
cargo pgrx test --features all_fdws,pg15
```

## Limitations

- Windows is not supported, that limitation inherits from [pgrx](https://github.com/tcdi/pgrx).
- Currently only supports PostgreSQL v14, v15 and v16.
- Generated column is not supported.

## Contribution

All contributions, feature requests, bug report or ideas are welcomed.

## License

[Apache License Version 2.0](./LICENSE)

[![crates.io badge](https://img.shields.io/crates/v/supabase-wrappers.svg)](https://crates.io/crates/supabase-wrappers)
[![docs.rs badge](https://docs.rs/supabase-wrappers/badge.svg)](https://docs.rs/supabase-wrappers)
[![Test Status](https://img.shields.io/github/actions/workflow/status/supabase/wrappers/test_wrappers.yml?branch=main&label=test)](https://github.com/supabase/wrappers/actions/workflows/test_wrappers.yml)
[![MIT/Apache-2 licensed](https://img.shields.io/crates/l/supabase-wrappers.svg)](./LICENSE)
[![Contributors](https://img.shields.io/github/contributors/supabase/wrappers)](https://github.com/supabase/wrappers/graphs/contributors)
